# UT_FVS
Using FIA tree-ring data to create tree growth models, which will inform forest management tools (FVS).

Project Summary

The US Forest Serive's primary management tool, the Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS), which is used to project forest dynamics, does not include the effect of climate variation on demographic processes. We propose the development of a FVS variant that incorporates climate sensitivities recorded in tree rings. Through a reproducible workflow, I will build a new tree growth model. Local data will be used to build a new model to inform a new variant. However, data from other species and regions can be used, following the established framework, to build new models to inform more variants. The advancement will enable forest projections to quantify the effects of climate variation on forest dynamics so that on the ground foresters can anticipate forest vulnerability to climate change and adaptively manage.

The new variant of FVS will be updated with a process-based model of tree growth built using tree-ring data, corresponding climate data, and forest inventory data. Through the recent development of a tree-ring data network throughout the interior West by the U.S. Forest Service’s Interior West Forest Inventory and Analysis (IW-FIA) program (DeRose, Shaw, and Long 2017), a unique opportunity is available to use the rich information in tree-rings, complemented by inventory data to parameterize FVS growth models. The geographic scope of the project will be Utah and Navajo Nation forests, where collaboration with foresters is strongly established.

Based on available data, several growth models, parameterized using tree-ring data and including climate sensitivities, will be created for four species (ponderosa pine, Douglas-fir, common pinyon, and Engelmann spruce). The new models will be compared to the current model to show updated performance with the inclusion of climate effects. The results of model performance will be reported in a Forest Service Technical Report, which will include model verification, a sensitivity analysis, and model validation. Model validation will ensure model predictions match observations. The model will give growth projections, which will inform management decisions by foresters. Foresters will monitor forest dynamics and provide data by which foresters can adapt management and model projections can be checked. Based on the results, models will be updated to give more accurate projections. The project will set up a cycle of near-term iterative ecological forecasting by biometricians paired with adaptive management by foresters (Dietze et al. 2017).
